 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                               POP CULTURE & SOCIETY      
       
 
Members Name:  
1. Aditya Raushan 
2. Adhar Agrawal          
3. Manvi Chawla     
4. Shruti Gupta              
 
POP CULTURE & SOCIETY       
    2018-2019 
  17104017    B11    
Adhar Agrawal          17104068    B12     
Manvi Chawla        17104041    B12           
           17104051    B12       
----------------Page (0) Break----------------
 
      Pop Culture & Its Relationship with Media
Celebrity Worship As a Part of Popular Culture:
        Celebrity worship is a high-level continuation of celebrities personal lives on a global 
scale.It is actually associated with consumer interests where celebrities convert their 
fame to become product brands.
 
Celebrity & Political Culture:
There  has  been  a  big  overlap  between  celebrity  and  political  culture.  This  is  a 
consequence of the huge platform given to 
a nationally unifying factor among all social groups. This unification and huge platform 
provided by celebrities has been a point of interest for political leaders and groups to 
gain farther reach within variou
acquire a celebrity image or to connect themselves with individuals who own this 
status. This can be seen with Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau who has become 
to some extent a celebrity because o
developing and liberal policies. Another example of this was Katy Perry campaigning 
and performing for Hillary Clinton during the 2016 Presidential election.
 
    
                  Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau
                                                                                                
                                                                                          
 
Pop Culture & Its Relationship with Media
Celebrity Worship As a Part of Popular Culture: 
level continuation of celebrities personal lives on a global 
sociated with consumer interests where celebrities convert their 
fame to become product brands. 
Celebrity & Political Culture: 
There  has  been  a  big  overlap  between  celebrity  and  political  culture.  This  is  a 
consequence of the huge platform given to celebrities. The gossip around celebrities is 
a nationally unifying factor among all social groups. This unification and huge platform 
provided by celebrities has been a point of interest for political leaders and groups to 
gain farther reach within various campaigns.Politicians self consciously try to either 
acquire a celebrity image or to connect themselves with individuals who own this 
status. This can be seen with Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau who has become 
to some extent a celebrity because of the realization of being likeable and supporting 
developing and liberal policies. Another example of this was Katy Perry campaigning 
and performing for Hillary Clinton during the 2016 Presidential election. 
     
Justin Trudeau                           Katy Perry and Hillary Clinton at the I'm With 
                                             Her concert, which supported Hillary Clinton
                                               in the 2016 Presidential Race 
Pop Culture & Its Relationship with Media 
level continuation of celebrities personal lives on a global 
sociated with consumer interests where celebrities convert their 
There  has  been  a  big  overlap  between  celebrity  and  political  culture.  This  is  a 
celebrities. The gossip around celebrities is 
a nationally unifying factor among all social groups. This unification and huge platform 
provided by celebrities has been a point of interest for political leaders and groups to 
s campaigns.Politicians self consciously try to either 
acquire a celebrity image or to connect themselves with individuals who own this 
status. This can be seen with Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau who has become 
f the realization of being likeable and supporting 
developing and liberal policies. Another example of this was Katy Perry campaigning 
 
 
Katy Perry and Hillary Clinton at the I'm With  
Her concert, which supported Hillary Clinton 
----------------Page (1) Break----------------
 
Social media: 
Celebrity culture is a continuously changing topic that progress as technology does. 
Distinct platforms are being implemented: Facebook, Instagram, Snapchat and all of which 
provide a new market for celebrities to demonstrate their ideas. Twitter is regularly 
changing celebrity ideas and provides an unregulated space for ideas to be shared. It gives 
a platform for celebrities to re-share their ideas. It also allows for people to comment, 
making it engaging to fans and followers. Instagram is also continues to be a popular 
market for celebrities, as it provides an market for purely pictures. Many of these pictures 
also include the people who are popular, improving their image and reaching to distinct 
fan bases. Lastly, Facebook is still a frequent used platform that many celebrities use. 
  Today, celebrity rules our world. Politics itself has become an exercise in performance. It 
is  an  addictive  disorder  in  which  a  person  becomes  excessively  involved  with  the 
characteristics of a celebrity life. Many people are obsessed over popular culture factors, 
such as magazines, films,  or fashion trends. This can be very destructive for young people 
who try to follow their favorite celebrities or pop stars.  
  Second, most celebrities serve as both an object of hatred, which some people might see 
and dislike them, and also of worship, for those who are obsessed with them. Hence, these 
celebrities represent what we endeavour to be and yet what we hate most about 
ourselves and by our society. I could say some of them set the wrong standard of beauty or 
acquirement for many of us. They motivate young children to be “beautiful” in the wrong 
way. In addition, they have created a new standard that affects many young children. 
Nevertheless, many people still worship them and still copy what they do or what they 
wear.  I think the majority of people who copy their favorite celebrities are people of 
young age rather than adults. 
----------------Page (2) Break----------------
       There is reality what is shown to people in social m
online sites used to show the body of celebrities 
actually behind the scene. Some celebrities ha
promote drugs and alcohol. The wrong way of diet is always is always being promoted 
and many youngsters feel pressurized in looking like the celebrities. Many youngsters 
set their goal to just become rich and famous. There are very less people who become 
successful in these industries. Real life struggles are never shown in media coverage 
which gives very unrealistic perspective.
 
       
 
 
 
         As a result the influences of celebrities as a god have both advantages as well as 
disadvantages  regardless  of  th
concerned about what they see online and follow. 
 
 
There is reality what is shown to people in social media and magazines. Many 
sites used to show the body of celebrities and you never know what is 
actually behind the scene. Some celebrities have very bad influences and some
The wrong way of diet is always is always being promoted 
and many youngsters feel pressurized in looking like the celebrities. Many youngsters 
set their goal to just become rich and famous. There are very less people who become 
uccessful in these industries. Real life struggles are never shown in media coverage 
which gives very unrealistic perspective. 
      
As a result the influences of celebrities as a god have both advantages as well as 
disadvantages  regardless  of  their  age.  Therefore  the  society  should  be  more 
concerned about what they see online and follow.  
 
edia and magazines. Many 
and you never know what is 
ve very bad influences and some even 
The wrong way of diet is always is always being promoted 
and many youngsters feel pressurized in looking like the celebrities. Many youngsters 
set their goal to just become rich and famous. There are very less people who become 
uccessful in these industries. Real life struggles are never shown in media coverage 
 
As a result the influences of celebrities as a god have both advantages as well as 
eir  age.  Therefore  the  society  should  be  more 
----------------Page (3) Break----------------
 
MEDIA AS SOURCES OF POP CULTURE 
   Media plays an important role in promoting, spreading ad shaping popular culture. 
Whether it is traditional media or new media, both play an integral role as a source of 
popular culture 
ADVERTISEMENTS AND POPULAR CULTURE 
Advertisements shown through different media such as the Internet, telephone, 
print media, postal system, television, radio play a great role in promoting and shaping 
popular culture. Advertisements are a great way to promote about a product, show or 
upcoming event etc so that people get to know about it.  
When products promoted by celebrities in adds tend to become trendy and people tend to 
use them since it is “popular” for example Virat Kohli and Anushka Sharma promoting 
Manyavar brand, Alia Bhatt promoting Caprese bags and Makemytrip app. etc.such is 
attainable by purchasing the product or availing the services of a certain brand. These 
advertisements are made very creatively and attract a lot of people. 
 
 
 
 
 
Similarly,When Food brands such as Domino’s, McDonald’s, Pizza Hut which are already 
famous and adored by people put an advertisement in newspaper, television etc about 
their new food item it comes in trend and people tend to try it as soon as possible. 
Apart from this there are certain advertisements which instils values in citizens such as 
advertisements showcasing patriotis. Certain Youtube advertisements also show small acts 
of kindness and how they spread happiness, women empowerment etc.  
 
 
 
 
----------------Page (4) Break----------------
 
INFLUENCE  OF  ONLINE  WORLD  IN  POPULAR  CULTURE  AND  OUR 
CHOICES 
Since the arrival of new media, everything is being digitalized and people through out the 
world have access to information and can communicate in an efficient way. Electronics are 
mass produced and nearly every person whether rich or poor has some or the other 
electronic device. It could be a phone, tablet or a laptop. Internet opens portal to an online 
world where people have the liberty to do whatever they want. 
With the emergence of social media platforms, it has given popular culture a whole new 
definition. Each person has the liberty to post whatever they want. Anybody can open up 
their youtube channel and upload videos. It helps people to showcase their talent to the 
world and get recognised. 
YouTube is a great platform and some people have really become famous through it and 
have a great fan following. One such person is Bhuvan Bam who has a channel named “BB 
ki vines” and makes videos playing different characters. Others are Prajakta Koli from 
“Mostly Sane”, Superwoman, the loved TVF actor “Jitendra Kumar” who is currently 
playing the role of Jeetu in “kota factory” and the list is endless. People also tend to take 
up their favourite characters habits such as dressing style, their way of communications, 
their famous lines into their daily life activities. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
It has also given recognition to some professions and these professions have now become 
popular. It has encouraged people to do these professions full time rather than just being a 
hobby for eg. stand-up comedians, fashion and travel blogger, dancer, musicians etc. 
Starting from Kenny Sebastian, Biswa ,Kanan Gill, Zakir Khan to newer ones like Jaspreet 
Singh, ManikMahna and list is endless.All of them are successful standup comedians and 
youtube was the one that provided them such a big audience. People love stand-up 
comedy to an extent that it even gets difficult to get seats in a particular stand up show. 
When Kanan Gill and Biswa came together with pretentious movie reviews it was one of 
----------------Page (5) Break----------------
the most trending topic of discussion in every peer group. These standup comedians also 
have shows on “Prime video” and are now even being starred in films due to their 
commendable performance and sense of humour. 
 
 
 
 
 
Social media has given a platform to many dancer or dance groups to showcase their 
choreography for eg “team naach” rose to fame since so many people loved their 
choreographies. There our other channels as well. People watch these videos and even 
learn from them when there is some event be it birthday,sangeet or wedding. Since these 
dancers take up latest songs people also get to know about trending songs.  
People have also opened their own dance academy  where they record and upload videos. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Social media has also given a path for food, travel, fashion bloggers etc to excel. They 
upload videos, write blogs, put short videos on Instagram on the products they use, places 
they travel to and food they try out at different places. 
All of this comes under popular culture since people tend to create looks that are shown 
by fashion bloggers and tend to buy products used by them. People tend to visit the places 
visited by food bloggers to try out the dish they tried. This has made peoples life easier 
since now they don’t  have to spend their mind thinking on what to buy or what not to 
buy, where to go out for dinner etc for they can now directly buy things or go to places 
that have been reviewed by  their beloved bloggers. For eg various food bloggers tend to 
put videos of unique food dishes that different cafes serve such wood box cafes platter, 
nitrogen ice cream. 
----------------Page (6) Break----------------
This doesn’t end here videos tend to go viral on social media and become popular such 
that either it becomes a trending topic of discussion or if it is a challenger activity then 
people tend to do it eg. a challenges such as “ice bucket challenge” , ”kikichallenge” etc  
were done by thousands of people across the world tagging other people to perform it as 
well. 
 
 
 
 
 
  Internet is a sea of information and promotes popular culture on a large scale 
 
THE CONTRIBUTION OF REALITY TV INTO POP CULTURE 
 
The first Reality TV was broadcasted in 1973. 
Reality TV is a television program in which there are no writers, actors. 
The shows focus on real situations. 
Reality TV has slithered into our culture. 
Some reality programmes are "Masterchef Australia", "The Rising Star" , "Indian Idol" etc. 
Reality TV depends on the willingness of individuals to have their lives played out in front 
of a camera. 
----------------Page (7) Break----------------
Reality TV shows are an important part of popular culture today as reality tv shows allow 
ordinary  individuals  chance  of  getting  fame  and
celebrities in front of the world.
Popular culture is concerned with only one thing, money and it will do everything and 
sacrifice anything to achieve it , including hurting the society it is meant to serve.
 
 
PUBG AND IT EFFECTS
PubG by Tencent games,  is one of the most played battle game
I and I am sure many  of you must have played this
If you don’t know what PubG is then 
PubG has both good effect and 
PubGis considered by parents as time
that these games destroy the brain. Violent video games are blamed by the mediaas the 
reason why some young people be
I 
Its not that video games only have bad effects video games make mind sharp, relaxes mind 
and mainly improves concentration.
 
       
Reality TV shows are an important part of popular culture today as reality tv shows allow 
ordinary  individuals  chance  of  getting  fame  and it  brings  the  real  personalities  of 
celebrities in front of the world. 
Popular culture is concerned with only one thing, money and it will do everything and 
sacrifice anything to achieve it , including hurting the society it is meant to serve.
AND IT EFFECTS 
,  is one of the most played battle game 
I and I am sure many  of you must have played this. 
If you don’t know what PubG is then you are not aware of the new trends of this world.
PubG has both good effect and bad effects on health, education, career of a person.
is considered by parents as time-wasters, and worse, some education experts believe 
the brain. Violent video games are blamed by the mediaas the 
reason why some young people become violent or commit extreme anti-social behavior.
 
Its not that video games only have bad effects video games make mind sharp, relaxes mind 
and mainly improves concentration. 
Reality TV shows are an important part of popular culture today as reality tv shows allow 
it  brings  the  real  personalities  of 
Popular culture is concerned with only one thing, money and it will do everything and 
sacrifice anything to achieve it , including hurting the society it is meant to serve. 
 
you are not aware of the new trends of this world. 
effects on health, education, career of a person. 
wasters, and worse, some education experts believe 
the brain. Violent video games are blamed by the mediaas the 
social behavior. 
Its not that video games only have bad effects video games make mind sharp, relaxes mind 
----------------Page (8) Break----------------
 
 
 
POP CULTURE  AND  MEDIA  PIRACY 
 
Exploitative media piracy sites are the swap shops where one can "share" "files" is just one 
of the many kinds of bollocks. 
And I am sure many of  us did and probably still willingly do take part in this free for all - 
films, softwares, games, and ebooks.  
We  hypocritically claim us as music lovers and then without any second thought  we are 
free downloading music from artists. These artists and musicians spend a lot of their 
efforts on one single song  ,thus they need their legal rights enforced under copyright to 
save their  efforts from vanishing  at just one go. 
Media piracy is nothing more than stealing  .  It may feel like victimless free culture to the 
user, but they are in fact participating in a digital black market. Major exploitative black 
marketers are blind tech companies wanting to get rich. They are capitalizing on the 
loopholes in the regulatory framework. In this sense media piracy is a symptom of  under 
development. 
Those who pirate media often would not consider it as a theft of any kind  Because of their 
negligence of this immorality, adults are  more likely than children to pirate movies, songs 
and games because adults make decisions that satisfy their moral compass, and children 
try  not to indulge in situations that will get them into trouble.  People may decide that it is 
okay for them to view illegal content because they simply cannot afford to buy it and they 
feel that they  deserve to see it. This is the main reason why piracy persists. Secondly 
earlier we didn’t have content providers like Spotify or Netflix, rather very less and  
----------------Page (9) Break----------------
 
 
inconvenient sources were available to consume media, and piracy filled in these gaps in 
the developing web. 
Filmmakers put such a large amount of effort into their projects but pirating films 
undermines their hard work. Their dedication and attention to detail should be a driving 
force that brings people to theaters for viewing. 
POP CULTURE AND LATEST  TRENDS 
1. BEAUTY AND APPEARANCE 
             Lip injections, butt injections, cheek injections, Botox are some of the latest prevailing 
trends these days.  These are not only mainstream but are also encouraged these days. 
Earlier times saw the worship of actresses that were uber thin but  Current pop culture 
trends now focus on curvy women. We see women spending a major part of their 
income in maintain themselves while generally for men, its just about a hair cut and 
shave. 
       
       2. ME TOO 
The Me Too movement, is a movement against sexual harassment  and  sexual assault. 
Thousands of people, including celebrities, replied with  #MeToo stories. It gained a lot of 
attention from all over the world The Movement empowered the women to form a 
community and help each other in talking about the bitter truths of sexual abuse in the 
world and has  helped the victims better fit in the society. It has  raised awareness among 
women about their rights as an individual in the work place or outside and has also helped 
men understand the consequences of the same. 
 
 
3. TIK TOK 
These days social media has become an integral part of our lives. There are so many 
applications out there which are meant for infotainment and entertainment. Social media 
is a platform which helps people to connect. On the other hand there are a lot of apps 
which also help people to earn name and fame. One such app is Tik-Tok. The fifteen 
second video sharing network is  now a days quite popular in the country. However, it has 
come under the scanner due to its misuse by the youth. It’s been a while since a new social 
application got huge fame. TikTok has about 500 million users and it’s going stronger by 
the minute. It a source of entertainment and leisure for people. 
----------------Page (10) Break----------------
 
 
Conclusion: 
   Media plays an important role in promoting, spreading ad shaping popular culture. 
Whether it is traditional media or new media, both play an integral role as a source of 
popular culture. The influences of celebrities as a god have both advantages as well as 
disadvantages regardless of their age. With the emergence of social media platforms, it 
has given popular culture a whole new definition. Each person has the liberty to post 
whatever they want. Anybody can open up their youtube channel and upload videos. It 
helps people to showcase their talent to the world and get recognised. Therefore the 
society should be more concerned about what they see online and follow. 
----------------Page (11) Break----------------
